Welcome to JW Broadcasting.
In this month's program, we'll learn how to develop and protect our God-given thinking ability.
Here are some highlights of what's to come.
In our next episode of Immitate Their Faith, we'll learn from Rebecca.
How did her love for God influence her choices?
A priest spent years lost an amaze of confusing teachings.
How did she escape the maze and find truth?
If you've been feeling like life is non-stop, you'll enjoy our latest music video.
It's a reminder to take a breath, pause and reset.
This is JW Broadcasting for July 2024.
Younger old, we need to consider the topic of thinking ability
and how to develop it effectively.
All of us can think. We can think about a lot of things.
Some good and some bad.
It's not uncommon, even for an adult, to let his mind wander aimlessly.
Or a person may spend time thinking of frivolous matters of little substance.
That's what can happen to our thinking.
But it doesn't always have a positive effect on our life or our future.
Those specifically address to a young man.
The Bible book of Proverbs gives sound advice for all of us.
Proverbs chapter 1 verse 4 says,
To give a young man, for that matter any of us, knowledge and thinking ability.
What is thinking ability in this verse?
The Hebrew word translated thinking ability can be used in a bad sense or in a favorable one.
So our mind and thoughts can be directed to a worthy, upright end or just the opposite.
If we incline our thinking to aspects of Jehovah's will and purposes,
we'll safeguard our own thinking ability,
directing it into the right channels.
How valuable is that type of thinking process?
Turn to Proverbs chapter 3 verses 21 and 22,
which states,
safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability.
They will give you life.
Thinking ability is not in the exclusive realm of the studious type.
Throughout our entire life, we take in information by reading, seeing, hearing and experiencing things.
And it's the way we take in information and react to it that shapes our individual behavior and personality.
Many persons have not used their minds for much more than the essentials of daily living.
But to succeed in life and in Jehovah's eyes,
it's necessary that we learn to train, develop and guard thinking ability.
Consider how trained thinking ability might protect us when it comes to using the Internet wisely.
While the Internet can be an excellent tool for gathering knowledge,
thinking ability when properly exercised will safeguard us from its harmful effects.
For example,
some popular social media sites contain short videos designed to deliver instant gratification.
If the viewer gets no immediate emotional reward,
he is tempted to keep scrolling to find material that will give the desired effect.
Now over time, this can lure one's attention span,
which may impede a person's ability to learn, retain and recall information.
None of us would want that to happen to us, would we?
Additionally, studies have shown that those who spend too much of their time with their electronic devices
are more prone to stress, anxiety, depression or other mental health problems.
On the other hand, thinking ability can help us to work out ways to control our use of such technology.
For example, God oriented thinking ability can help us to distinguish truth from misleading and false information.
Thus there is wisdom in what is stated in Proverbs chapter 2 verses 11 and 12.
Thinking ability will keep watch over you,
and discernment will safeguard you to save you from the bad course.
Why is this so important?
Well, thinking ability and discernment gives us perception,
and perception is closely related to our conscience.
What we have meditated on from God's Word and stored in our mind can mold our conscience,
which is an inner mechanism to warn us of wrong actions or tendencies.
In effect, our thinking watches over us.
Now notice how this is alluded to at Hebrews chapter 5 and verse 14.
But solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their powers of discernment
that is their thinking, trained to distinguish both right and wrong.
All of us, both young and old, should think carefully about the following suggestions.
Firstly, grow in knowledge of Jehovah.
Proverbs 9 verse 10 says in part,
knowledge of the most holy one is understanding.
Coming to know Jehovah is a blessing and a protection.
We need to pray to Jehovah for insight when we study,
apply ourselves to Bible reading on a regular basis and immerse ourselves in the truth.
We should talk to Jehovah in prayer as our closest confident.
This means using our thinking ability to convince ourselves that Jehovah's advice is the best advice.
Because doing so will safeguard us when we're tempted, tested,
or put into a situation where we know we must say no.
Remember who we are, what we stand for, and to whom we have dedicated our life.
Next suggestion, we need to continue to enhance our Christian personality.
This is important, but why?
Because people who love Jehovah will like and respect us for who we are.
And what kind of personality are we suggesting?
Did you note the expression Christian personality?
That means Christ-like.
We cannot go wrong by imitating Jesus in any way possible.
Recall that 1 Peter 2 verse 21 says,
to this course you were called because even Christ suffered for you,
leaving a model for you to follow his steps closely.
Jesus' whole way of life, his attitudes, his values, his interactions with others,
culminated into a personality that we should strive to follow closely.
We know well how we want to look when dressed for a special occasion.
We cloth ourselves with careful attention to details.
Colossians 3 verse 10 picks up on the illustration of clothing.
There it states,
and cloth yourselves with the new personality.
Similarly, Romans 13 verse 14 tells us,
put on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and do not be planning ahead for the desires of the flesh.
We have to think about Jesus' personality constantly.
It certainly does not come naturally to us in perfect descendants of Adam.
It takes real thinking ability.
And remember, in this case, we are not clothing ourselves just for one special occasion.
This is to be our daily wardrobe.
To the extent possible, with our imperfection,
we continuously work to reflect Jesus' personality.
Next suggestion.
Give priority to our priorities.
What does this mean?
To accomplish things in life, we must have schedules, routines, and priorities.
For instance, at Bethel, much work is accomplished because of the daily routine
and because of giving priority to spiritual matters.
At Philippians 1 verse 10, Paul said,
to make sure of the more important things.
Paul's some thinking ability will help us to see the value
of organizing our life each day to give priority to the most important things.
Next suggestion.
Keep a modest view of our own knowledge and experience.
Thinking ability will help us to filter the information we let into our mind.
The real test of whether our thinking ability has been properly trained
is how we apply knowledge.
So we need to be cautious in life.
Ask questions, fact check, get advice, read, study, and learn from Bible principles.
And once we've accumulated knowledge, insight, and thinking ability,
modesty is involved in how we share it.
The Apostle Paul said at Romans 12 verse 3,
I tell everyone there among you not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think,
but to think so as to have a sound mind.
Yes, we need to display a modest outlook on our acquired thinking ability.
Did you notice it said to think with a sound mind?
Not an inflated mind, not thinking more of ourselves than is necessary to think.
Another way to use thinking ability in this old world is to avoid debt.
Now why is this our last point?
Because material things are not the most important things in life.
Many work themselves to death to gain material prosperity.
However, as Christians, there's other work that's related to worship.
We want to work ourselves to life.
Yes, focused on everlasting life, yet ahead.
It's true though that some money is needed to buy the necessities of life.
Whether we're young and just starting to earn a living or we're older
and have been working secularly for years, we need to learn to manage and budget money.
This involves using our thinking ability to separate needs from once
and being cautious about accumulating much debt.
Remember, according to Proverbs 22 verse 7, the borrower is a slave to the lender.
These few suggestions are but a sample of areas in life where we need thinking ability and discernment
in order to analyze our situation, make decisions and determine future plans.
Always remember the advice of Proverbs 3, 21 and 22,
safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability.
They will give you life.
Yes, and we may add, even everlasting life in God's righteous new world.
Young people in the Bible used our thinking ability to make wise decisions.
Rebecca was one of them.
Let's see how she was able to make a life-changing choice.
Long ago, Abraham sent his servant Ellie Ezer to find a wife for his son Isaac.
He knew God's purpose required a woman of deep faith.
But who would be willing to leave their home and travel into the unknown?
Mother, I'm back.
Hello, my dear.
Rebecca!
Your cousin has been looking for you.
Anna, I'm over here.
Rebecca, can you bring this to father?
Yeah, is he still working?
Still working.
Rebecca, I've been looking for you. Can I come with you?
Sure.
Hello, father.
My husband said you needed this.
Thank you.
Can I help with anything?
You can come with me to the well.
Not today. We need your help making dinner.
Okay.
Good day.
Please, give me a little sip of water from your jar.
Drink, my lord.
I will also water your camels until they are done drinking.
Excuse me, my lord.
Please tell me, who's daughter are you?
Is there any room in your father's house for us to spend the night?
I will not eat until I have told you what I have to say.
Please, speak.
I am Abraham Servant.
And Jehovah has blessed my master very much.
Sarah, the wife of my master,
bore a son to my master after she grew old.
So my master made me swear saying,
you will go to the house of my father to my family.
You must take a wife for my son.
But I said to my master, what if the woman is unwilling to come?
He said to me,
Jehovah will send his angel with you
and will certainly give success to your journey.
When I got to the spring today,
I said, Jehovah, the God of my master Abraham.
If you will make my journey successful,
here I am standing at a spring.
When a young woman comes out to draw water,
I will say, please,
let me drink a little water from your jar.
And she will say to me,
you take a drink,
and I will also draw water for your camels.
Let that woman be the one whom Jehovah has chosen for the son of my master.
Before I was finished speaking in my heart,
there was Rebecca coming out with her jar on her shoulder.
After that, I asked her, whose daughter are you?
To which she replied the daughter of Bethul.
So I put the ring on her nose
and the bracelets on her hands.
And now tell me,
if you wish to show loyal love
and faithfulness to my master.
But if not,
tell me,
that I may proceed one way or the other.
This is from Jehovah.
Let her become a wife to the son of your master,
just as Jehovah has spoken.
The negab is far.
When will you come back?
I can't you just stay here.
You heard what my father said.
This is from Jehovah.
You can serve Jehovah here.
That is true.
What do you know?
Jehovah will bless you
in ways you can't even imagine.
We still have time together.
Let's make the most of it.
Why me?
Gather all the men, prepare the camels.
We must leave soon.
Right away.
Why are you packing?
Please, send me off to my master.
Let the young woman stay with us for ten more days.
At least ten more days.
She can go.
Do not detain me.
Seeing that Jehovah has made my journey successful,
send me off
in order that I may go to my master.
Let us call the young woman
and inquire of her.
Rebecca,
at least we're wants to leave right now.
Will you go with this man?
I'm willing to go.
Rebecca,
our sister,
may you become thousands times ten thousand.
And let your offspring take possession
of the gate of those who hate them.
Praise Jehovah.
I'll miss you.
Rebecca did not know what lay before her.
And there is no record that she saw her family again.
She showed faith when she left the comfort of home.
Jehovah blessed her as an ancestor of the Messiah.
Her faith is worthy of our imitation.
Overall, Rebecca had a life of few regrets.
The opportunity for the same blessing is there for you too,
if you imitate the faith of Rebecca.
Some people feel that faith and science are at odds.
They say that a thinking person cannot believe in God.
Is that true?
See how these young people use science to build their faith.
When you believe in creation,
what challenges might you face?
My favorite subject for science,
because I learned facts about how things are connected.
I thought that was really exciting,
seeing how the physical world works.
But then you come to a topic like evolution.
And you immediately know that there's something here
that's not quite right.
In 5th grade, when I was around 12,
we had science, my worst subject.
The teacher was fully convinced that we descended from apes
and that the evolution theory is the truth.
You realize that you're probably the only one in that room thinking
this is not true.
Then you might start questioning yourself.
Is the teacher wrong?
Or have I maybe believed something wrong my whole life?
It's a little challenging,
being alone in such a situation.
What helped you to build your faith in a creator?
I spent a lot of time on the bus,
to and from school,
readingjw.org,
and the five questions brochure.
Actually, to make up my mind on what I believe in.
I did a lot of research when I got home that evening,
and my parents helped me search on our website.
What helped me the most was the video,
what your peers say,
belief in God.
I remember one small scene that stuck with me.
It was a glass bottle that was pulled up from the sand.
Yes, it's made of the same material,
but it definitely didn't form by itself.
There has to be someone that turns it into a glass bottle.
And I found that very logical.
It really convinced me that there is a creator.
I remember there are three things necessary for life.
I learned it was RNA, DNA, and proteins.
If they were to exist at the same place and at the same time,
that would be very rare.
And on top of that,
it would be as if those three things
then should team up and say,
we would like to create life.
A cell that in turn would become an animal,
a person, or many other things.
This made me realize that believing this
would require even more faith
than believing that there is a God
who has created everything.
So, I sent a text message to my teacher
with my viewpoints about me believing in a creator
and added a link to the video.
He then asked if it was okay
if I showed the video to the class.
And I said, of course,
I watched the video so many times
that I knew all who lines by heart
and knew exactly which scene came one and what hair.
So that if someone in the class had any questions,
I would know the answer.
The last five minutes, I got to appear in front of the class,
explained a little about Jehovah's Witnesses
and that we believe in a creator
and said I had a video that convinced me of that.
And when I was about to press start,
the bell rang for a break.
But everyone stayed in the classroom to watch the video.
I thought that was really fun.
How does having faith in a loving creator help you?
It makes everything more meaningful.
You're not thinking,
here I am,
I'll just live the way I do till I die.
And that's it.
You believe that there is a purpose to life
and it also opens the possibility
of a hope for the future.
Around us, there are so many people
who have different views and theories
and that can have a big impact on us.
So if you don't have a strong faith,
then someone can pick away at your faith
and try to break it down.
Yes, I am very grateful
that my parents taught me about creation.
So I always knew that there is a loving father out there
who has created all the beautiful things for us.
You can just go out into nature.
The sun is shining.
Look at all the beautiful colors and autumn.
It's so nice.
What you can do is really just be grateful.
Now I am 100% convinced that creation,
it is a fact.
That's how it must have begun.
These young people had doubts,
but they faced them head on.
You can too.
Don't be afraid to talk to mature Christians.
Do your research and reason on what you learn.
To make inaccurate knowledge,
you'll find satisfying answers.
That's what Cotry wanted.
Answers to life's big questions.
She was a Lutheran priest in Finland.
How would she find real truth?
Let's find out.
My mother taught me from a very young age to pray.
For us, it meant chatting openly with our Heavenly Father.
Every day conversation,
that was a valuable life lesson
that has empowered me throughout my life.
Growing up, I always wanted to become a teacher.
But after reflecting on it a bit more,
I realized that what I really wanted to do with my life
was to work for the Kingdom of Heaven.
So, how could I do both?
I decided to pursue a career in theology.
My goal was to become an instructor in the church.
When I started working for the church,
I quickly discovered that the teachings of the church
contradict what the Bible says.
One question left unanswered by the church was,
why suffering exists?
A pastor could only stammer and say,
well, it can't be explained because it's a mystery.
But I didn't think the existence of suffering
could be a mystery at all.
I realized that I had to find a way
to satisfy my conscience
and still uphold the position of the church.
So, while I was teaching, I would explain,
this is what the church teaches.
But this is what the Bible says.
If you want to learn something,
what do you want to learn?
And then, the most tragic moment of my life happened.
I was 22 years old
and in the middle of planning for my wedding,
when my fiance died in a car accident.
Of course, this changed my life completely.
It was the most painful feeling.
I just knew deep down that now,
I would never marry or have a family of my own.
So, I had to find a way to survive,
day after day, year after year,
and look for another way to leave something meaningful behind.
So, I buried myself in my work.
The position at the church that I had been working toward
was discontinued and changed to the role of a priest.
Altogether, I did congregational work for 33 years.
And then, when my health couldn't take it anymore,
I did other tasks for the church.
I was giving everything I had to give.
But whenever I looked to the church to give something to me,
I was always left empty.
I prayed for many years.
Lord, help me find my real spiritual home.
This was my prayer for about 10 years.
And then one day, I came across Jehovah's Witnesses.
Immediately, I said to my Heavenly Father,
this is what I have been searching for.
What do you have for me?
That was the first thing I asked them.
The first meeting I attended made a big impression on me.
I remember, in particular, the verse in the Gospel of John,
by this, all will know that you are my disciples,
if you have love in your midst.
And I thought, I've been searching for this all my life.
And this is it. It's right here.
My closest friend was deeply shocked when I told her
that I was going to leave the church
to become one of Jehovah's Witnesses.
When she calmed down, she said,
I will support you, as I always have,
but promise me you won't change.
Four years later, she came to visit me again.
She kept watching me closely
and said, you have changed.
I was startled and asked, in what way?
She said, it looks to me like you're happy.
My prayer to find a spiritual home was answered.
And I experienced the great miracle of finally finding
what I had been looking for my entire life.
We are glad, Cotry, found the spiritual home she prayed for.
A painful loss was a turning point for her.
Suffering can cause any of us to wonder, why me?
Why now? Does God care?
Brother David's plan of the governing body
examines how we can quell the squighting thoughts
in the following morning worship.
Have you ever gone into trouble trying to do the right thing?
If you have, think about Jacob.
Now Jacob did the right thing.
Rather than marry out of the truth like his brother Esau,
he traveled to the home of a believing relative, Laman,
and asked for the hand of his daughter, Rachel.
I didn't work out so well.
Jacob was tricked by Laman into marrying both Rachel
and her older sister, Leah.
And the women didn't get along very well.
In fact, they acted more like rivals than like family.
Now Jehovah saw what Laman was up to, but he didn't intervene.
And Jacob didn't blame Jehovah, as if to say,
well, why is this happening to me?
I followed instructions. I did the right thing
and had a look where I am today.
No, that wasn't Jacob.
Now later on, Jehovah fixed the matter
by giving the law to Israel.
You must not take a woman in addition to her sister
as a rival wife.
Well, that law seems to have Leah and Rachel
written all over it, doesn't it?
But in the meantime, he did sustain Jacob.
He did help Jacob through his trial.
Now a bright spot, in all this, was Joseph,
and he's the subject of our comment today.
The Jehovah began dealing with Joseph
when he was just a teenager, and he gave him two dreams.
Now the first dream was about food,
sheaves of wheat.
Sheaves bowed down to his sheath.
Now that was appropriate, wasn't it?
Because later on, not only Joseph's brothers,
but almost everyone in the known world
was going to look to Joseph for food.
Now the second dream included his father,
and strangely, his mother,
who had died giving birth to Benjamin.
Now in that dream, the sun, moon,
and eleven stars, that would include Benjamin,
bowed down to Joseph.
Now there's no record that Joseph ever attempted
to interpret that dream.
But Jacob and his sons got the point,
and they were offended.
Jacob kind of accused Joseph of being presumptuous.
He said, am I your mother and your brothers
really going to come and bow down to the earth to you?
Now we won't comment on the fact that
Jacob automatically assumed that he was the sun in that dream.
But by means of the dreams, what was Jehovah telling Joseph?
He was telling Joseph that he had something special in mind for him.
He had a purpose for Joseph.
So what do you suppose the devil wanted to do?
Well, a devil wanted to frustrate that purpose.
He wanted to keep that purpose from being fulfilled.
So Satan must have been overjoyed when he heard Joseph's brothers
plotting to put him to death.
Would they have followed through with it?
Think about Simeon and Levi.
They didn't hesitate to mow down all the men of Sheikam
when one man raped their sister.
Now the oldest of the brothers, 24-year-old Ruben,
talks the others into sparing Joseph's life.
Now did Jehovah move him to do that?
That could be.
But certainly in line with his purpose.
So instead of telling Joseph, his brothers sell him to a band of Ishmaelites.
Now I want you to tuck that in the back of your mind.
Ishmaelites, because we're going to come back to that a little later.
So the Ishmaelites bring Joseph down to Egypt
and he becomes a slave to Pottiefar,
the chief of Pharaoh's bodyguard.
Now Joseph is a slave.
What happens three years later?
His grandfather Isaac dies.
And Joseph, the slave, can't be there to say goodbye.
Kind of reminds us of many of us during this pandemic, doesn't it?
But as with us, Jehovah was with Joseph.
He was a great success in Pottiefar's household
until Pottiefar's wife accused him of rape
and Pottiefar threw Joseph into prison.
But we can say that Jehovah was with Joseph
because he went to prison.
Why can we say that?
Prison was probably the mildest form of punishment
that Joseph could have suffered.
He was a Hebrew slave and under Egyptian law,
Pottiefar could have killed him on the spot
because of the accusations.
Or he could have had Joseph arrested
and the court could have ordered a thousand lashes.
Joseph would probably have died under the lash.
Well, that gives us perspective when we read in the Mosaic law
that an Israelite could receive up to forty strokes of the rod.
Not a thousand lashes.
This was love on Jehovah's part.
He wanted to prevent the Israelites
from being cruel like the Egyptians.
Now, let's use our imagination a little bit.
Later on, Joseph interprets a dream for Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh makes him his chief advisor.
Now, imagine, Joseph kneels and receives the signet ring
from Pharaoh.
He rises and takes a step back.
Out of the corner of his eye,
he sees someone standing near the throne.
Someone who's trying to make himself very small.
Pottiefar, the chief of the bodyguard.
I don't know about you, but that possibility
makes me smile when I think about it.
And can you imagine what happened
when Pottiefar went home to lunch that day
and told his wife who was now his new boss?
I wonder how much sleep she lost over that.
Pottiefar's wife did a terrible thing.
But so did Joseph's brothers.
In fact, if the law had been enforced,
Joseph's brothers would have been put to death for kidnapping.
Later, Jehovah made kidnapping a capital offense.
He may have had Joseph's brothers in mind when he did that.
Now, some think that Simeon masterminded the kidnapping plot.
And that might explain why Joseph chose him to stay behind
when he sent the rest of his brothers home.
Now, let's get back to Jehovah's purpose.
Jehovah has a purpose for Joseph,
and Joseph brings the family down to Egypt.
Now, that's part of the prophecy, but there's more.
Gone told Abraham that his descendants
would be afflicted by foreigners for 400 years.
Well, Israel left Egypt in 1513 BCE,
so when did the 400-year start?
In 1913.
What happened that year?
Isaac's half-brother.
What was his name again?
Ishmael.
Ishmael persecuted Isaac.
But was Ishmael a foreigner?
His mother was an Egyptian slave.
At his descendants, the Ishmaelites had Egyptian blood,
interesting that the Israelites
followed in the family tradition
by crucicuting Isaac's grandson, Joseph.
Jehovah didn't incite Joseph's brothers to kidnap him
and send him down to Egypt,
but he did use the event to carry out his purpose.
He didn't always prevent bad things from happening to Jacob,
like marrying sisters who didn't get along,
or to Joseph, like being falsely accused.
He didn't put a head around them,
but he did help both of them to face their trials
every step of the way.
He did that for them.
He'll do it for you, too.
So if you ever get in trouble trying to do the right thing,
think of Jacob.
Think of Jehovah.
Jehovah will help you.
He will never abandon you.
To see Jehovah's support,
we may have to set aside time to meditate.
In this month's music video,
we see just how powerful it is
to take a break, take a breath,
and take in God's creation.
Sitting around the fire,
beneath the million stars,
letting go of the cares of the day we share,
the reflections of our art.
It's so nice to make the time
to think of all that good.
Daily gifts from above,
how God shows us His love.
Feel us with gratitude.
We're just taking a moment
to change our focus.
Slowing down to a cup and reflite,
on the simple things
that joy it brings to slow down,
to take a deep breath,
voice and reset.
Shines through.
Our spirits are lifted,
arms from our father up high,
as we see the big eyes we face.
Our Jehovah's warm and brave.
We're just taking on the things to slow down,
to take a deep breath and reset.
Our thinking ability will enrich our life now
in so many ways.
We'll make wise decisions that draw us closer to Jehovah.
We'll address any doubts to our faith.
We'll safeguard the practical wisdom we've found in the Bible,
and we'll secure a perfect life in the future.
In our postcard for the month,
we'll visit Burundi.
It's located in the often called Heart of Africa,
bordered on the southwest by Lake Tanganika.
Burundi is full of green rolling hills,
cascading waterfalls,
and rich agricultural land.
Lake Tanganika is the longest freshwater lake in the world,
and the second deepest.
It's absolutely bursting with life.
Over 2,000 species are found here,
with 500 of them found nowhere else in the world.
The local fishermen tap into this natural bounty,
hauling in tons of fish every year.
Burundi is also a preaching paradise for fishers of men.
There are now over 17,000 publishers in the country,
and they had an incredible memorial attendance in 2023
of over 65,000 people.
But it was not always like this.
From 1977 to 1993, the preaching work was banned.
Our brothers were persecuted and even imprisoned for their faith.
Now when the opportunity comes to preach, they seize it.
For example, Sara Nayonggeko walked 45 minutes to school each day,
that way she could save money for preaching in seldom-work territory.
The Burundi Bethel family,
and the 83 publishers of the Bojumbura Hiho Shah Center congregation,
send warm greetings to all their brothers and sisters.
From the world headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting.